[Music]
pj
o'rourke the legendary bad boy of gonzo
journalism
and andrew ferguson the finest pro
stylist and wittiest observer in
washington today or for several decades
joining us to discuss their wasted youth
and the present predicament a special
plague time edition of uncommon
knowledge with peter robinson pj and
andy thank you for making the time
pj you're at home peterborough new
hampshire
exactly right and andy you are in
arlington virginia
that's exactly right all right boys to
the introduction
patrick jake o'rourke grew up in toledo
ohio
he became one of the inventors of gonzo
journalism during his decades of writing
for national lampoon
at rolling stone and at least a dozen
other publications
he's the author of again well over a
dozen books including the best book
ever written on the way washington works
parliament of horrors
everybody's entitled to an opinion that
ladies and gentlemen is a fact
it's the best and his book on the
election of 2016
how the hell did this happen p.j
o'rourke now serves as editor-in-chief
of american consequences
andrew ferguson grew up in illinois and
has been writing about politics and
culture in washington since the reagan
years
now at the atlantic andy has written a
number of books including most recently
crazy you one dad's crash
course on getting his kid into college
new york times columnist david brooks
has called andy quote
the greatest political writer of my
generation
and for once david brooks was correct
um gentlemen my
middle son just the other day hey dad
do you know what we call the coronavirus
we kids
we call it the boomer remover
on one side of us the greatest
generation
on the other side our kids millennials
or gen xers or whatever they are you've
got three pj andy you've got two
but of course it's about us uh we
consider ourselves at the very peak of
our performance full of years and wisdom
the kids think we're about to shuffle
toward the exits
but how do you grade our generation
how has the baby boom generation of
americans comported itself
pj um i i hate to say
worst ever um because
because i've got kids and uh and and you
know
they're they've yet to prove themselves
completely worthless
but uh no i think the baby boom has just
been um
uh an absolute horror show uh we
um uh we we grew up with uh
way too much uh prosperity uh
parents who are far too kindly and
decent
unlike their parents had been um we
faced one major
challenge in our youth uh the war
in vietnam and um we ran from it as best
we could
um i i feel sorry for the guys who got
caught
uh weren't quite as quick on their feet
as as i was uh we faced one great
challenge uh we completely flunked that
um we've elected uh a fair number of
idiots
uh and we've really just topped out
recently
and um yeah i would say we're awful
andy i can't
i can't argue with that i might i'm a
self-loathing uh baby boomer myself
um one thing you can say about baby
boomers
i think you can uh which is that there
is a higher number of self loaders
among baby boomers probably than any
other generation
so we may be uh venal
and uh maritricious and
stupid but at least we know it
so is that is that self-loathing simply
the current expression as we get older
of a self-absorption that has always
been oh i've had i've had it for years
all right one really unpleasant thing
about self-absorption as you get
older is who and what you're absorbed in
you know i mean when one was young and
trim and
fit and so on it was one thing to be
self-absorbed but to be self-absorbed in
an old and flabby
not very well and somewhat forgetful
person was really and i that that and
and that's
hence the pandemic you know every
generation gets the uh this is
this is our crisis here this is our
depression this is our world war ii
um every generation gets the crisis it
deserves
but the one thing crisis is supposed to
do is bring people together
we got a crisis that keeps people six
feet apart
um you know it's interesting though it
says that usually
people when they're facing crisis you
know they say this is my own personal
vietnam but
baby boomers can't say this is the baby
booms vietnam because
vietnam vietnam
oh gentlemen
sco all right pj has raised the top at
covet 19 and
all but a few thinly populated states i
think the
number of states is seven out of the 50.
so that means 43 other states
we've all been told to walk away from
our jobs and
stay at home and wear face masks and
wash our hands
and for weeks now tens of millions of
americans have done
just that does the does the sheer
willingness to obey of americans in this
crisis
surprise you concern you or does it
strike you as entirely appropriate
we should be scared out of our wits and
obedience is a simple corollary of that
andy what do you think well i remember
the great uh
scene in that um revisionist
western with dustin hoffman little big
man where he meets up with um
uh wild bill uh hiccup
and hiccup consists of sitting with his
back to the wall so he can see the door
and little big man says well why are you
doing that bill why you always sit there
he said
because i'm afraid of getting shot and
um
that's kind of you know i'm not too
surprised people are all indoors because
they're afraid of catching this deadly
illness that will especially if you're
my age or over or even if you're peter's
age
he's much younger than i am um you're
likely to
you're likely to buy the farm yeah
all right so the conservative andy
ferguson pj just told us it's entirely
appropriate for us to obey meekly
you have gone through life as a
libertarian which is a different stripe
of creature
do i get anything from you any urge to
rebel any wish that we'd
put up more of a kick over this um
i'm absolutely opposed to all of this
closing down society and the economy and
i am obeying every
injunction to do so to the letter
because when it comes to weighing
courage versus principle um
uh the uh cowardice one out uh uh
yeah i i i am and quite reasonably
i think uh i'm frightened of getting
this
um i also
i i don't i think there is something
that's not i worry of course that the
government
will is having so much fun bossing
everybody around
and it won't want to quit having that
fun after this is over
in fact the government will be reluctant
to declare that it's over or parts of
the government will
i mean who who could possibly imagine a
scenario where andrew cuomo
is likable
i've never heard a single kind word
about him and all the time that i have
been covering politics which would be
his entire political career um but just
you know
it is going to be tough for them to let
go but i think there's something i think
there's something else going on here so
i really do think that um um
people do want to help
people are and they don't know how they
can help
uh you can sew a few face masks at home
or one can
i can't um and and so i really think
that they're obeying not so much
out of deference to government or like
or even fear of the disease
but out of the out of some sort of of
desire
for better social good which is is kind
of sweet
i think in a way i'm i'm i'm touched a
lot of people are
putting themselves to huge huge
inconvenience
and you know deprivation
andy you wrote recently the new
quarantine regime
has relieved considerable pressure on
the introvert community
the world has caught up with us at last
you're enjoying yourself
i wrote that a few weeks ago
yeah it kind of even the the
the introvert in me has started to get a
little
extroverted um yeah this has gone on
about as long as
as i can take it i'll probably take it
for a few more weeks but uh
i like what pj said you know i've
actually strangely seen this
in in myself which is very unusual to
see this kind of
fellow feeling in myself but um i hate
wearing this mask i have a little
homemade mask
that i keep in my cars for when i go out
to the store or whatever
um and i i would not
wear the mask except it makes people
feel better it doesn't make me feel
better but it makes
everybody else feel better uh and so
when i go into
you're never you're not surly about it
you do it
i i confess i only put on the mask when
either
it's required and there's certain stores
here in northern california where you're
not permitted in unless you're wearing a
mask
or i receive the evil eye from three
people in a row that's my rule
yeah i just want i hate it no yeah i
hate it too but i want people to feel
better and feel more comfortable it's
bad enough for everybody
as it is
this interview ends right now that i've
already established that two of you have
gone
soft we have sweethearts pj o'rourke and
andy ferguson what's happened yeah
yeah it's um um you know it started with
the trump election and it just went down
from hill
downhill from there and the next thing
you know
i'm going to be uh feeling the burn i
i don't know what's happening to me uh
but i actually haven't tried the mask
yet
uh i have not you live in peterborough
new hampshire that's
i have not dropped this property really
i have not been off the property for six
weeks
uh which i have discovered is just
fine with me i am
i mean i'm in a very lucky position i
i'm in a beautiful place up on top of a
hill we've got a bunch of land
and i'm just uh um i've discovered i
really didn't like to go out
anyway
uh uh you know other people are
well was it wasn't it start that said
their hell
and uh yeah i really don't mind i've got
i got two of my kids home
and um they're going nuts of course but
i am i'm enjoying having them around
um i i've got a wife who's masking up
and
doing the shopping errands and like the
lone ranger
and um
i yeah i honestly i mean
it's it's weird but i don't really mind
it
okay back to the baby boomer boomers and
what we have wrought
products of our generation anyway this
is mandatory uh for the three of us who
got to know each other during the 1980s
how did this happen how did the united
states of america go from donald from
ronald reagan
to donald trump andy
pj
now what i'm after here is okay there's
all kinds of contingency
what i'm after here is is history just
one damn thing after another and
sometimes there are happy bounces and
sometimes there are bad bounces
or does it say something about the
trajectory of the nation
morals morale well-being
that we go from ronald reagan to donald
trump power of stupid
um libertarianism and conservatism
are actually extremely complex
philosophies uh i mean i'll give you a
couple
of of examples for this try reading
michael oakshott
it's just nearly impossible to do and
then there's
i'm trying to remember who i think it
was chesterfield that pointed out that
that being a conservative is actually
the hardest work in the world
it's a it's an activist proposition if
you have got a
red white and green post and you want to
conserve that
post exactly as it was a a post out in
the field a pillar or something
and you want that to be red white and
green and crisp and clean
exactly the way it's always been you
have to go out there and scrub it and
paint it and
and shoe the birds off the top and keep
the uh
you know keep people from ramming their
car into it and so on
it actually takes a lot of work to
conserve things and another
problem with with conservatism be
besides it being hard to grasp and
leftism is very easy to grasp
you don't have anything because somebody
took it away from you we're going to
take it back and give it to you for free
gotcha got it yeah got it no no problem
uh but conservativeness is very
i mean you know balancing individual
liberty with individual
uh um responsibility uh
is is just is a terribly difficult thing
to do
and it is and and conservatism
easily drifts off into things that are
easier to understand like the sort of
populist
bigotry that donald trump represents
and um you know the left can't drift off
into stupidity because it's already
there
but we we made the mistake of winning
we're a fabulous opposition party it's
great to have bill buckley standing
uh uh uh you know amidst the tide of
history
yelling stop you know but then his
then that tide of history actually did
stop
and we were in charge and it quickly
degenerated
andy here's norman podhoretz norman
podhoritz now
90 years old former editor of commentary
father of neoconservatism maybe maybe
the grandfather of conservative
journalism
here's norman podhoritz on donald trump
the fact that trump was elected
is a kind of miracle to save us
from the evil on the left his virtues
are the virtues of street kids you don't
back away from a fight
and you fight to win close quote andy
can you find anything in there to agree
with
uh no no he's not a fighter he's he's
just
he's he's a name-caller and he's uh
um
yeah he's a spoiled kid who who uh
you know generally speaking got his way
um and always has and uh
but he's from queens i guess so that
makes him think that he's tough but he's
you know he's if you push him he's like
every other bully he just backs off
and uh but doesn't really fight for
things and people are
saying that he's a fighter no he's not
he's not really he's
he hates the people that he hates and
he's contemptuous of them just as
they're contemptuous of him
but that's quite different from being a
fighter pj on joe biden joe biden is a
zombie
from the policy cemetery of the carter
era with a stump performance like the
living dead
close quote all right we've talked about
ronald reagan to donald trump how do we
go from the democratic party
of john kennedy and hubert humphrey and
lbj
and your old friend andy eugene mccarthy
to joe biden pj yeah
well the power of stupidity works uh
works on
in in both parties i mean the
traditional democratic party had a
pretty delicate balancing act
to do itself i mean they they had the
left
they've always had that sort of
left-wing thrust where we're going to
take everything
from the rich people and distribute it
to the poor or we're
a robin hood but up until
a lot and up until i don't know
up until hillary clinton maybe uh they
always thought they had to balance that
with with with some kind of pragmatism
you know i mean like like like the head
of the
uaw had to balance his anger at the
bosses at gm
with keeping his members employed
he couldn't destroy the corporation off
of which he lived
so democrats have always had to do the
delicate uh
any par they're a parasitical party and
any parasite always has to be careful
not to kill its host
reminder coronavirus thank you um
and but somewhere they just sort of lost
sight of that
and uh and decided that that they would
go with the h.l menken
uh definition of practical politics is
the auction of goods about to be stolen
andy what would your friend you you you
befriended him in his final years what
would your friend
jean mccarthy have made of joe what
would he have made of the democratic
party today
uh i it's hard to know what his politics
were
uh at the end of his life he was very um
he was suey generous uh you know he
he quite admired uh reagan
loved jack kennedy hated bobby kennedy
it was all a very complicated
um set of opinions that he had
but he was basically in economics he was
basically a socialist so i don't think
that he would be too alarmed by all this
i think what he would one thing that he
would really
dislike is the balkanization is the word
we used to use
of the party and the um the obsession
with different kinds of americans i
remember
he was amazingly uh kind of disgusted
when in the 68 campaign he discovered
that his
rival robert kennedy had developed a
um a campaign
organization that had committees for uh
26 different kinds of americans
and you know and that really was quite
cuban democrats italian democrats
yeah people didn't or you know rich
italian democrats middle-class italian
democrats
you know and mccarthy said i know baskin
robbins has 32
varieties of ice cream but i didn't know
there are 32 varieties of
americans and i think that would quite
alarm him that this
this business of identity politics is so
essential to the party
now back to the 1980s
if i may back to the 1980s which is when
the first
the three of us first got to know each
other well pj was already a famous
journalist i was a white house
speechwriter and he became a
white house speechwriter
i maybe the two of you had a more
nuanced view of things
than i did but i felt we were getting
some place and it wasn't just
youthful high spirits that the united
states stands up to the soviet union and
it demonstrates the power for
good of democracy and we cut taxes and
roll back regulations and demonstrate
the power
for good of capitalism that we were
establishing
permanently valuable lessons
we were reaching conclusions and today
china is on the rise communist china
and young americans who were once the
strongest supporters the most
disproportionately ronald reagan was
most popular among the youngest age
cohort
they're now the disproportionate
supporters of bernie sanders
young americans are socialists they're
the supporters of bernie and elizabeth
warren
so did the 19 was i
simply deluded was it really nothing
other than youthful high spirits did the
1980s accomplish
nothing how do we wha i i i
i'm this is this is this you guys handle
the humor i'll try to give a few i'll be
i'll be
abbot you'd be castalo if you wish but
what i'm asking for here is
does any of this mean anything did we
get anything
done with all those efforts of ours that
we were pouring out in the 1980s
andy well it sounds like you fell for
the progressive fallacy which is
that history has some kind of direction
and you know reagan's rhetoric
had a lot of that in it and i blame you
for that actually
um but also partly it's that
um we were wrong about a lot of things
i mean we all thought that okay you
you know you bring china into the family
of
nations uh let them open up their
markets
free market and capitalism will will
compel this kind of democratization
and in you know 25 years we're going to
have a
liberalized us uh yeah china and of
course we were
wrong about that we thought that the
collapse of the american
family would yield all kinds of hellish
social results and crime and so on
it collapsed and actually things like
abortion rates
and pre-teenage pregnancy or down
so we you know life was much more
complicated than we thought when we were
young i guess that's sort of
an old man's lament isn't it well i
would
be if the old if that old man were
making this old man feel better but
you're not
pj well i was i am older than you guys
and i i was not a kid in the 1980s and
i'd been through my 60s stage of
youthful idealism i turned 40 in the
1980s
and turned 40 during the reagan
administration
and um yeah i think andy's right that we
were wrong about certain things
wrong or we were oversimplifying them
one one thing that caught us by surprise
was that we assumed um
given our belief in the self-organizing
the hayaki and self-organizing
abilities of human society
we assumed that the newly freed
countries behind the iron curtain would
go out and self-organize
himself in an organized way we did not
realize
how deeply damaged those societies had
been
by the by the not not so much by the
oppression of communism
although that too but by the corruption
of communism we didn't realize what a
corrupt
structure had been left behind even when
the people who built that structure were
gone
so we should have been a little smarter
about that uh then
um um we had this idea and it's an idea
that's true
i think in the long run but but it can
be the very long run
very long run is that free markets
result
in freedom and they do
eventually we must remember that
that europe had free markets of various
forms
for hundreds and hundreds of years
before those
those free markets resulted in the kind
of freedoms that we were talking about
but then we got blindsided by something
that we so those two things we should
have foreseen but there was something
that we
couldn't have foreseen no one could have
foreseen
which was an a a a sea change in the
economy
i mean equal to the industrial
revolution the
the electronic economy comes along
and it's still so new that we don't even
yet know what this actually means
but we do know that any fundamental
change in economic structure
even if it's a change for the better is
deeply disruptive
and so one of the reasons millennials
are
such lefties is that
the economy that they sort of expected
to to to enter as adults has disappeared
they're all making a living by driving
each other around in uber
and you know and who can blame them for
being mad
actually i my
i took a trip to the airport about six
months ago and found myself chatting
with the uber driver who had graduated
18 months earlier from princeton
university
with a phd in philosophy yeah well
it was it was he had taken his degree in
hispanic studies
it wasn't let's put it this way he was
not a computer scientist
journalism and speaking of disruption
you've both made your entire careers as
journalists
and a conservative journalist pj
libertarian journalist their cousins
slightly different but cousins
why does this profession
overwhelmingly attract liberals
pj you want to go oh i i've spent a lot
of time
thinking about that and um i think we
spent years trying to figure it out
yeah i really blame it entirely on the
uh on the movie uh uh uh
version of watergate not on watergate
itself but
on the uh the there were all these
like uh uh well-meaning twerps out there
who were going to join the peace corps
and then they saw
woodward and bernstein played by robert
redford and dustin hoffman
never mind that any journalist is going
to end up being played by dustin hoffman
not robert redford but
you know they didn't quite get that
through their heads all and all
all these little world savers um
pointless little world savers
well-meaning jerks
thought oh no not the peace corps i'm
going to become
a journalist i really think there was a
because up until
uh the woodward-bernstein era
up until all the president's men uh
journalist i mean i'm old enough to have
still worked with these guys you know
the newsroom was
blue with lucky strike smoke you know
everybody had a
pint of booze in the in the in the
drawer and started hitting at about 10
a.m
you know and uh it was a
maybe it tended a little bit to the left
but that was just because that was a
you know the the little guy you know it
was all about
like supporting the little girl if it
was the left it was more of a new deal
left
more of a new deal left or an old union
solidarity left or you know
something something like that you know a
little uh
nelson algren type of thing
but um but they they weren't idealists i
mean these guys i mean
lincoln go back to megan of course it
wasn't like that
but megan said the reason that you
become a journalist is it's a ringside
seed at the circus
and of course now uh
they've taken the elephants out of the
circus i mean all we've got left at the
circuses
is the little clown car they put too
many clowns in but
never mind that's a that's a that's a
side point but
i really do think it's the world that
has got a hold of it
yeah do you remember this is coming back
first time i remembered it for years
the informal motto of the daily
of the new york daily news used to be
tell it to the mcsweeney's the
stuyvesants already know
did you ever hear that one oh yes it's a
beautiful thing but that's
that's that's that's the little guy
we're sticking up for the little girl
that's totally commendable and
understandable and conservative in its
own
own way yeah yeah andy what well
i think most journalists still think
they're they're doing that
uh the conditions around them think that
they're standing up for the
little guy and that they uh have
contempt for the
well-to-do and the rich the the thing is
journalism
the the conditions around journalism
have changed so that it attracts a
particular kind of busybody
and um uh
a reform-minded sort of person rather
than
the kind of you know just just the facts
man
ma'am and just tell it like it is and
all that kind of stuff
um it's it's much more uh
a profession it's not a profession it's
much more of a trade for people with
reform minded who want to
want to make the world look better for
themselves
take pursue that a little bit
in the old days and by the old days i
remember i'm talking about the days in
which we were all
young men that journalism
i can remember thinking in college it
would be the coolest thing actually it
would be the coolest thing in the world
to be
pj o'rourke but there were magazines you
wanted to write for remember when
esquire was a
written mag not men's style but there
was writing okay
so we all know that the business model
for this has just
collapsed all the advertising has moved
to facebook and google and you can't
afford to publish a magazine anymore
and the weekly standard a great
publication
finally the billionaire who was
supporting it gets tired
off the weekly standard dies
and the answer to that from my children
i don't know if yours have the temerity
to try it out on you the answer to that
is no no don't worry about it
all the good journalism is in the
computer somewhere
it's all migrated online there are just
as many great writers you just have to
look around for them a little bit
by that or has something been
permanently lost
something has been permanently lost that
simply isn't true that
you know there's some good reporting
that's somewhere around the internet if
you if you sort through enough of it
but but you know i mean uh
takes me forever to sort through it so
there's some reasonable reporting
but there used to be a sort of a career
arc to uh
journalism that that that not everybody
followed but that everybody knew about
and it was kind of there as a model
uh you the first impulse had to do with
the writing usually
uh nobody set out to be a reporter
people sat
set out to be writers uh if if your
reporting chops were only where you know
some of the people who were the best
writers and kind of the worst reporters
wound up as sports writers
because you could sit in a chair and do
your reporting right
but but they were beautiful beautiful
writers and the idea was to be a a great
you know was to write well and then like
you'd be noticed by the slicks
by the magazines and your stuff would be
picked up and plus you had a novel in
your drawer along with that bottle of
jack daniels was there was a novel you
were working on
and uh i know three or four old
newspaper guys from the generation
before me
who did indeed write uh uh uh decent
novels maybe they only wrote one maybe
they never really broke into the
big time but but they wrote but there
was a career arc out there
to be had and that that doesn't exist
anymore
uh uh journalism never paid really well
it pays pitifully now
right and so naturally it attracts the
uh this
people without enough to do the
busybodies and nosy parkers of the world
and and and um
yeah no there there's been a real loss
and the quality of the writing
is just not good i mean
even in even in the new york times
uh you know i i even in new york times i
i see reporters who cannot
cannot tell the difference between um um
whether they're there is you know
between quantity
and number you know whether there is
less of something or whether there are
fewer of those things
um never you know i really just i really
disagree with that
i think you do yeah i really do i think
there are some
wonderful wonderful writers out there uh
and people younger than we are of course
everybody's younger than we are
uh you know the the uh there's a great
line from
head of the fcc somebody said to him you
know he was defending television and
they said well you know
95 percent of television is crap he said
of everything is crap and i think we're
romanticizing
the uh the greatness of the of the
those old newspaper writers i mean some
of them really do stand the test of time
others don't stand up all that well um
uh but at the risk of sounding like a
suck up i
i work with several writers that i would
put
in in the category of uh at the atlantic
now
yeah yeah of a royco or
um you know one of one of the legendary
greats from the old days and a lot of
the legendary greats as i say weren't
all that great i mean pete hamill
i'm sorry he's lionized is an embodiment
of that old style that pj's talking
about but he's terrible he's a terrible
writer and always was does breslin stand
up does jimmy breslin stand up
no well not to me i went back and read a
bunch of him
for something i was writing about two or
three years ago and it was
hastily done factually suspect
um very self-conscious hack-made
stuff i thought okay let me tell you two
stories
and just see what you do with them and
here's story number one which was told
to me by tom wolf
who followed that arc and tom wolf was
at the herald tribune
when walter when when john kennedy was
shot
and they turned on the television in the
newsroom at the herald tribune and they
watched walter cronkite and
wolf said to himself
this is the moment newspapers and
i suppose in those days there was still
at least half a dozen newspapers in new
york newspapers are done
people are getting their news from
television this is the moment when
there's a decisive shift
and the next morning as he walked from
his apartment back to the herald tribune
offices of the herald tribune
and of course nothing had been on it had
been on television non-stop all night
long
he walks through manhattan and there are
lines at every newsstand
around the corner and he said
what he drew from that is no
it's not real until people read it
the written word has a power that
nothing else
quite touches okay
that's story number one story number two
three or four thousand years ago when i
was when i was an undergraduate
at dartmouth college i got a great job
working
reunions i had to sit in a dorm and
alums would
leave the dorm where they were staying
for their three or four day reunion
they'd give me the key and at two in the
morning when they came stumbling back in
i'd give them the key back
eight hour shift i was there all night
and i read a book a night
thirty years later i go back for a
reunion of my own and it turns out the
same
job still exists but all the kids who
are working reunions
are not reading they're watching movies
on their laptops
all right andrew try to cheer us up
about that
boy i'm sorry peter you were right and i
was wrong
[Laughter]
i think a lot of them are probably
reading stuff
on their laptops i mean you're just not
worried about this
what are you going to do what good is
worrying going to do okay
okay pj will you well you have recourse
to tony soprano what are you going to do
i was listening to andy talk about the
wonderful writers that exist today
and you know i i i andy's more deeply
involved
with the printed word and any more than
than i am
but i do still i am still editor of a
of a web magazine and i do i've got some
great writers there's no doubt about it
but there's kind of no place for them to
go with with what they do so i was
sitting listening to annie and i was
thinking gosh andy i hope you're right
you know i hope you're right
and i do know that some of those old
legendary types
were at the best very much of their
moment and
at their worst were were hacks you know
um but that 95 of all things are shut
this
you know that does come but the reading
thing there's absolutely no doubt about
it i got three kids
and um uh
two of them really just don't read and
and and one of those two
is the is the best student of the three
and the most serious
academically most serious of the wants
to be an archaeologist
is studying all the tough stuff in
college um
taking the hard sciences where were her
the the girl that does read her elder
sister
is the one who's an art history major
and will soon be driving that uber
to take you to the airport um
no the kids really don't read and we've
got a house full of books we must
we we must have five thousand books in
the house
and i i i've worked for years to kind of
build this
library because i've looked around for
decent hardback editions used decent
heart back when used bookstores still
exist
use decent hardback editions of all the
books that i've loved all my life
and you know part of it was my own
collecting
thing but part of it was for the kids
and can i get them to crack one
even now you know when everybody's
sock drawer is over organized when you
know
when we truly have run out of things to
do no
all right gentlemen a couple of years
now
i thought i was depressed when peter
finished his thing now i'm really
depressed
um andy yes
i'm going to paraphrase a an email of
yours
actually i'm not going to paraphrase it
i'm going to i'm gonna quote this
and if it offends you we'll cut it out
but i think i can get away with it
i care less and less about politics all
i ask from any writer nowadays is some
evidence
that he recognizes that all of this
matters
the deep sense that we're all equally
under some kind of
care and judgment when i encounter a
writer like that i'm astonished and very
very grateful close quote
is that so
all the stuff that we cared about in the
1980s doesn't matter
well explain yourself to working
journalists here
well that's not a comment on writing or
journalism that's a comment on
what people believe in now and what what
intelligent
people are expected to believe it wasn't
that long ago when any intelligent
person had some sort of sense of the
transcendence or the weight of the past
and and the accumulation of great
tradition in the
religious traditions particularly say
the catholic church
that's all i was commenting on there i
think and
the the the the culture is so deeply
secularized
and it's so absorbed into
the way especially um intelligent
well-educated so to speak young people
think
um that that that that is disturbing to
me that's
that's not good pj let me add some more
disturbance
um because not
yeah yeah not only am i depressed on
on the point that andy made and i i
really do
uh find it like harder and harder to see
some system of belief let alone
spiritual belief
that some some some coherent moral
system that
underlies i mean people want to be nice
they want to be
good um but they don't seem to
you know andy and i've had this
discussion um
uh a number of times is that you
you can be a moral person while being an
atheist but it is a lot of work
it's really you have to go around robin
hood's barn you know to do it
i'm not saying it can't be none but but
it but
it's tough and i would prefer it if the
kids believe in god which they don't
seem to do
but they also don't understand that it's
meaningful that it's important what
they're covering in politics
because underneath politics under the
layers and layers and layers of politics
many of it frilly
many much of its silly much of it frothy
is the power of the gun ultimately
politics is about one person's
ability to force another person
to do something it all
lies under is it
is is all the basement is violence
the foundation is violence is violence
if you get a parking ticket
you don't pay that ticket you get a fine
if you don't pay that fine
you go to court and you get a bigger
fine if you don't pay that fine they'll
throw you in jail if you're trying to
escape from jail they'll shoot you
basically you can't
park on a double yellow line because
they'll shoot you
and not enough kids remember that when
they start talking about oh the
government should do this for me the
government should do that for other
people the government should be bigger
more involved with this we should have
freed this that and the other thing
is is that you are expanding that
foundation
of violence when you expand government
it's not just because like i'm an old
fuddy-duddy and want my taxes to be
lower although i am and i do
um andy on on abraham lincoln in a
recent essay the ultimate concern for
lincoln
was the survival of the union to which
he had an almost mystical attachment
close quote an almost mystical
attachment to the union
if there is a theme that runs through
all of your work pj and andy
from beginning to end from young
rambunctious
boisterous bad boys to
[Music]
gentlemen full of wisdom pj now lord of
the matter sitting on top of his hill
surveying acres and acres
if there's a theme that runs through all
of your work
it is a an abiding fondness for the
united states of america
even if it's a fondness for the circus
aspects of this
so imagine some socialist
bernie supporter some one worlder kid
your own children perhaps what do you
what do you say
what do you say to that kid let's say
i'll start with you andy
to persuade him that the united states
of america is distinctive
and in some way still worth it all
uh you know i think chesterton said
about patriotism
um you love your country because it's
your country
and you know the way you love your
mother because she's your mother she's
not because
she's the best mother or the kindest
mother or the best cook
or the best you know carpenter or
whatever
you love your mother because she's your
mother and that that's
the foundation of what patriotism is and
i think that that's true but there's
also
something more with the united states
which is the united states
is a actually is uniquely
um worth caring for and loving because
it is
the um the container of the great idea
of the declaration of independence
and um that's why people revere lincoln
still is because he
he preserved that idea and
um it's sort of a distillation a grand
culmination of a lot of wonderful things
in
the western tradition um so you can have
patriotic and that idea is that idea is
that all men are created
equal that's the central idea that
you're referring and that governments
are instituted among them to
preserve certain rights that are
inalienable unalienable uh
endowed by a creator uh so you can have
you can
love your country's the united states
simply because you're an american and
you just
you love the country you were born in
and raised in and are grateful to it
and but you can also love it america as
a
intellectual proposition pj
well uh yeah i mean what he said
there is no doubt i mean we we didn't
invent the idea of liberty
but we invented the idea that liberty
could be organized
so that a government served a free
people
and at the time that lincoln was
fighting the civil war
we were the only country in the world
that could be of which that could be
remotely said
although the british had a lot of
liberties or i should say the english
had a lot of liberties and some of their
in some welsh maybe or something a few
lowland scouts
although they had a lot of liberty they
were still subjects
in america the government was subject to
we the people
and um we invented that idea we are the
original
experiment for that idea without our
invention
of that idea it would not exist anywhere
else
and so yes that gives us a
a a a you know
something that makes us a little more
than just equal to any other country
in the world it makes something that
gives us a sort of first among equals
and when things go wrong here and they
sometimes
do and they certainly did in lincoln's
time and they're not doing so great
right now
um the whole world watches and says well
china says well this doesn't work you
know an interesting little 200 year
experiment you know a mere wink of the
eye
and chinese sense of time but obviously
you know this this this idea of a
government serving of people
and uh uh
so okay then this will be the last
question
you've been generous with your time but
pj raised the question of china they
outnumber us
they've got a government that seems to
be able to handle handle a virus more
efficiently than
than ours there's some doubt about
whether they're telling us the truth but
they seem to have contained it
they've gotten rich they've raised half
a billion people out of poverty
not just during our lifetimes but during
the last quarter century alone
half a billion people raised out of
poverty
and they've got a model that all the
rest of the world is looking at now
china seems to work the united states
what's going
over the long term
not i'm not asking for a chestertonian
answer i love the united states because
i love the united states but as over the
long term
who'd you put your money on this 240
year old constitution that we have or
the rising power of china
p.j all my money on the united states
as i've spent some time in china uh
the most time that i spent there was
back before
things were before things got worse but
xi jinping things have definitely gotten
worse
but the chinese although they have you
know they've made tremendous
strides but of course when you begin
with zero
all strides do look amazing so i mean
you don't have to go that far
outside china's wealthy cities to be
back in another millennia
you know there's one electric wire
running into that village that makes it
different from what it was in 1600
um and the chinese hate their system
and the chinese when you get them you
know really talking
to you and you realize they realize you
weren't going to report them
for anything would say
the government is sleeping don't wake it
up
don't wake it up you know the the
mountains are high the emperor
is far away that's when things were
going
well in china you know and and now
um i don't think the trainees are very
we may think they did a good
job of controlling the uh uh the
outbreak from their
you know the wet market and wuhan um
uh you know they they've banned
undercooked bat meat and
and and good for them but i don't think
the chinese
people are all that jacked about what a
great job their government did on this
andy who's your money on
usa usa usa
would you care to elaborate no i think i
just i i just um
in my experience and i think in his
historically over the last couple of
centuries that's where all the
that's where all the safe bets are
so we are still number one crotchety
three crotchy old guys can still agree
on that much cynical decision never
bet against free people especially when
they've got guns
pj o'rourke man of long
storied career now editor of american
consequences
andy ferguson of the atlantic
thank you thank you my pleasure for
uncommon knowledge
the hoofer institution and fox nation
i'm peter robinson
[Music]
you